#Articles

The following document reflects some of my initial thoughts about articles I am encountering as I am immersing myself, once again, in the collaborative literature. Each article/chapter/commentary is introduced with it's BibDesk key. 

**barile2012multilevel**:

* There is no meta-theoretical or even midlevel-theoretical references in this work. Instead, the author is staying really close to the results from previous coalition studies (i.e., this is related to this, etc.). This is not a bad thing, but has me thinking that something I can add to my work is some kind of nod to the importance of scientific paradigms, and what these theoretical orientations open up. 
* Heavy use of the coalition's *Theory of Change* as a way of justifying dimensional selection/understanding of the data at hand. This fits well with how I think about this, and have written about it. 
* A major point of this article is to examine the factor structure of the dimensions of collaboration, and to do so in a multilevel SEM framework.  However, one could also argue that if the Theory of Change drives you to select dimensions of coalition functioning, then your indicators will always be so specific that your results simply cannot generalize.
* A critical thing this study ignores is that a multilevel model will allow you to see variation in the nested levels, but the factor structure has to be the same at level 1. The study doesn't violate this explicitly, but it's making the multilevel model sound like it's doing more than it is in the context of this study. 
* Most of these studies examined measurement structure at the individual level without accounting for nesting of observations (Jasuja et al. 2005; Kumpfer et al. 1993; Valente et al. 2007), another surveyed only collaborative directors (Thomson et al. 2007), and others have aggregated data to the setting level and then examined measurement structure.
* "MCFA accounts for the nested structure of the data (i.e., the non- independence of observations within collaboratives) ..." Nice.
* "MCFA is superior to single level latent factor modeling of collaboration because it accounts for the unreliability of individual level reports of collaborative level constructs (Mehta and Neale 2005), providing more accurate and precise estimates of associations at the collaborative level..." Nice. 
* Article pushes really hard for reliable ad valid measures of collaboration. SEM will buy you some cache on the reliable front, but you still have to grapple with construct validity and content validity (at least as it pertains to . If you presuppose measures onto the collaborative, keeping in mind it is the collaborative's theory of change that is driving your dimensional selection, then you are biting off your own hand on the theoretical front. In the case of this paper things are a bit better because the survey was created from the collaborative's *Standards of Excellence.* However, how involved were the members in setting up these standards? Presumably if the ecological validity of your measure rests on these standards all the members feel the standards are valid? They later describe using the partnerships definitions as a limitation of the study.
* Highlights the point of multiple perspectives in evaluation a coalition. Why? E.g., Staff rates all dimensions they deal with daily higher than people who don't do those tasks. 
* Analyses: initially tried to replicate the structure of the survey as the collaborative saw it, then had to parse down and settle on 5 factors, different from what the survey was supposed to measure (keep in mind researchers didn't develop this survey).  What does this mean in the context of developing community specific measures, if the community specific measures breakdown at the factor level? In an applied setting it means people aren't measuring what they think they are measuring. While we know what this means statistically, there are many things
* Results: Taken together, findings from the four models suggest that there are likely multiple semi-independent dimensions of community col- laboration that may also serve as indicators of a higher- order collaborative functioning factor
* Results: we found five dis- tinct dimensions of collaborative functioning: participatory planning process, internal communication, leadership effectiveness, family involvement, and budgeting
* Results: These five distinct dimensions of collaborative functioning have previously been identified as aspects of collaborative functioning and linked to intermediate out- comes such as member satisfaction, engagement, and per- ceived effectiveness (Butterfoss et al. 1996; Florin et al. 2000; Gottlieb et al. 1993; Hays et al. 2000; Kegler et al. 1998; Kumpfer et al. 1993; Riggs et al. 2008; Rogers and Howard-Pitney 1993; Weiss et al. 2002; Shortell et al. 2002; Zakocs and Guckenburg 2007).
* Results: Furthermore, according to the Partnership’s Theory of Change they are thought to be the means by which collaboratives manage the challenges of interorganizational collaboration to obtain its benefits, including coordinated services and increase public awareness of targeted issues in the inter- mediate term, and improved outcomes for children and families ultimately.
* Should a meta-theory generalize to smaller colalboratives?

**koliba2009communities**

* Communities of Practice = CoP
* This paper provides a nice framing for my paper in terms of what a metatheory might provide the field. 
* There is a nice framing for the learning: "learning is a process that takes place in a participation framework, and therefore is mediated by differences of perspectives in a CoP group. This is how a community learns, and how those situated in this context learn. 
* Communities of practice can be understood phenomenologically as relational structures that are mediated by and through the social construction of knowledge. 
* CoPs valuable because they lead to the creation of social capital. (this might be nice tie to some arguments I make around emergence in my paper).
* CoP been used widely in literature, and to describe different kinds of social relations (e.g., apprentice and mentor or identity formation in groups in social psychology. 
* In terms of collaboration there is the view that CoP can "play a pivotal role in understanding how governance gets carried out through interpersonal dynamics, and as a way to examine how organizations engage one another. (I'm thinking that for this to be accurate the CoP framework really needs to acknowledge the multilevel structure of interests among individuals and entities in collaboration. 
*  Wenger (big on CoP Theory) Explanation of CoP: Communities of practice are ‘groups of people who share a concern, a set of problems, or a passion about a topic, and who deepen their knowledge and expertise in this area by interacting on an ongoing basis.’ They operate as ‘social learning systems’ where practitioners connect to solve problems, share ideas, set standards, build tools, and develop relationships with peer and stakeholders . . . [They] feature peer-to-peer collaborative activities to build member skills and steward the knowledge assets of organizations and society. (Snyder et al., 2003, p. 17).
* I like the idea that the collaboration, or engagement in a CoP can change the identity of a member, but it seems like the one motivation is a desire to engage in "shared knowledge creation." I think that there is much more to why individuals engage with one another in collaboration, and it's nor always a desire for such endeavors. 
* A community of practice exists when: "1. A group has formed that can be said to be comprised of members. These members share a common set of characteristics that may be compromised of similar interests, expertise, roles, goals, etc.; 2. A physical or virtual space exists for these members to interact directly with one another. Spaces can be created through the formal or informal designation of physical meeting times and places or virtually, as space for ongoing dialogue. This space affords opportunities to dialogue with one another and that this dialogue is not mediated by a third party. This space forms the basis through which a “shared repertoire” for the group can emerge; 3. The group can be said to possess a common domain, practice or set of practices." **Again, you could pick this apart with RDST very easily, as it seems to just be incomplete**
* Individuals in CoPs are involved in a process of “mutual engagement,” which is described as the realm of relationships and ultimately, the sphere of social capital (Snyder et al., 2003; Wenger, 2004).
* The concept of mutual engagement hinges on the extent to which the characteristics of community, including member relationships and the nature of their interactions—levels of trust, belonging and reciprocity, etc. exist.  **More in line with my thinking**
* The second feature of a CoP is the matter of engaging in a “joint enterprise,” which Wenger and his associates describe as the realm of purpose and “domain”—referring to its common purpose and the sense of members’ identification with a topic or practice (Snyder et al., 2003).
* “Communities of practice are groups formed around a shared interest in which discussion builds on the values and motivations of their members” (O’Donnell et al., 2003, p. 83). **Again, in line with my thinking.**
* Practice is, first and foremost, a process by which we can experience the world and our engagement within it as meaningful” (1998, p. 51). The practices that emerge from this common purpose are understood as “indigenous enterprises” that are shaped by organizational, personal, historical, societal contexts (1998, p. 79).
* A CoP’s joint enterprises are said to be held together through “mutual accountability” (1998, p. 81), essentially the level of reciprocity that exists between and among members of a CoP.
* "Hodkinson and Hodkinson have observed that, “The research task is not to see whether [CoPs] exist or not, but to identify their characteristics . . .” (2004b, p.6). **They believe that an “intermediate” unit of analysis (Hodkinson & Hodkinson, 2004b) designed to bridge the individual and the organizational levels is needed"**
* We believe a concerted effort by theorists and researchers to define and opera- tionalize a set of such variables will go a long way toward moving CoP theory from a set of normative assertions to empirically determined ones. These variables can include assessing CoPs in terms of: 1. thegoalsandrelationshipsforlearning, 2. themodeandqualityofknowledgetransfer, 3. thedegreeofformalization, 4. thestrengthofcoupling.Underthesemajorheadings,asetofdiscretecharac- teristics or variables can be culled.
* Community of practice members can be asked about the level of efficacy they feel for their CoP decision-making processes and decision-making authority. *Again, you have this thing that is a developmental system that you are seeking to explain the BeH of through one level of data.*
* *How do we get to knowledge generation and sharing?*
* *I think RDST helps explain a CoP as a developmental system.*
* *Can I take this paper and describe the details of it as an RDST?*
* *I should find some critiques of CoP*
* *Think: what is the role of learning in collaboration?*
* The notion of “coupling” is a widely recognized analytical construct in organi- zational development theory (Perrow, 1967; Weick, 1976). In essence, the degree of coupling of a social entity is aligned with its quality of cohesiveness.
* **A paradox persists: to name CoPs we run the risk of ruining them (Stamps, 1997) by essentially undermining their capacities to self-organize.**
* there is a need to develop a set of “defining characteristics” of CoPs, and thereby move beyond Wenger’s (1998) narrow construction of CoPs as a tightly coupled ideal type. **Possible?**
* **wholisitic typology that may be used to describe and evaluate CoP activity**
* Here's my window in **future research should focus on questions related to CoP development.**
	* My question is: Can a relational theory help explain all the other things these authors say is needed?
* Efforts have been made to look at the relationship between CoP participation and an individual’s experience (O’Brien & O’Brien, 2002; Hodkinson & Hodkinson, 2003; Adams & McCullough, 2003), although more can be done to explore the relationship between an individual’s membership in a commu- nity of practice and her or his trajectory within and across CoPs.
* Wenger has asserted that an individual’s trajectory within a CoP can be peripheral, inbound, insider, boundary, and outbound in nature (1998).
* Handley et al. (2006) suggest that individual identity is not only shaped by one’s membership within a CoP, as Wenger suggests, but influ- enced by an individual’s involvement within multiple CoPs, as well as the wider environment that provides external forces onto the CoP.
* What Conditions Foster Individual Participation in CoPs?

**kozlowski2013advancing**

* Tons of nice framing in this article
* Multilevel theory and research have advanced organizational science but are limited because the research focus is incomplete. Most quantitative research examines top-down, contextual, cross- level relationships
* Yet there is reasonable consensus across disciplines that two fundamental processes span the multiple levels of organizational systems: (a) top-down, contextual effects whereby higher level phenomena constrain, shape, and influence different lower level phenomena (i.e., cross- level effects) and (b) bottom-up emergence whereby dynamic interaction processes among lower level entities (i.e., individuals, teams, units)—over time—yield phenomena that manifest at higher, collective levels.
* Explicit attention to conceptualization is critical. Drawing on com- plexity theory, we define emergence as a dynamic, interactive process and specify three core con- ceptual foci to capture its essential nature: It is multilevel, process oriented, and temporal.
* Direct approaches rely on prospective observations that capture the process and manifestation of emergence as it unfolds. Most quantitative research is indirect because it infers emergence, whereas the vast majority of extant efforts to investigate emergence directly are quali- tative (Kozlowski & Chao, 2012a). Qualitative research provides a rich descriptive foundation for theorizing about the process mechanisms that undergird emergence. However, quantitative research is needed to advance theoretical precision, verification, and extension. Our focus is on advancing quantitative research methods for investigating multilevel emergence directly.
* Definition. Kozlowski and Klein (2000) define multilevel emergence in organizational behavior as a bottom-up process whereby individual characteristics and dynamic social interaction yield a higher level property of the group: ‘‘A phenomenon is emergent when it originates in the cognition, affect, behaviors, or other characteristics of individuals, is amplified by their interactions, and manifests as a higher-level, collective phenomenon’’ (p. 55).
* Also rooted in complexity theory, Crutchfield (1994) noted that ‘‘some of the most engaging and perplexing natural phenom- ena are those in which highly structured collective behavior emerges over time from the interaction of simple subsystems’’ (p. 516), Axelrod (1997) stated that ‘‘the large scale effects of locally inter- acting agents are called ‘emergent properties’ of the system’’ (p. 4), and Epstein (1999) defined emergent phenomena as ‘‘stable macroscopic patterns arising from the local interaction of agents’’ (p. 53). In sociology, the ‘‘individualist emergentist’’ perspective (Sawyer, 2001, p. 563) represents a similar conceptualization, such that system-level behavior is ‘‘an emergent consequence of the inter- dependent actions of the actors who make up the system’’ (Coleman, 1986, p. 1312).
* With respect to these differing conceptualizations, general systems theory (von Bertalanffy, 1968) describes emergent phenomena as holistic, greater than the sum of the parts, and irreducible.
* This view is not consistent with our complexity theory conceptualization of multilevel emergence. It is also inconsistent with other sociological accounts that assume micro origins for the properties of social collectives (e.g., Coleman, 1987; Hayek, 1942; Homans, 1958; Mill, 1843; see Sawyer, 2001). From our perspective, the issue is not one of reductionism, that is, of deducing the properties of macro phenomena from their micro origins. Rather, the issue is to deduce the process mechanisms inherent in micro interaction dynamics that yield the higher level phenomenon. As Kozlowski and Klein (2000) expressed it, ‘‘We wish both to understand the whole and keep an eye on the parts’’ (p. 54). The goal is to understand the process of emergence through system dynamics across multiple levels—simultaneously.
* The process of emergence begets structure in the form of an emerged phenomenon that then shapes subsequent processes (Allport, 1954; Giddens, 1979; Katz & Kahn, 1966). Finally, Kozlowski and Klein (2000) argue that a given phenomenon, although it is not explicit in the definition, can emerge in different ways or forms; the dynamic process by which a phenomenon emerges need not be universal in form.
* First, emergent phenomena are multilevel. They encompass at least two different levels of analysis, a lower level at which the phenomenon originates (e.g., individual cognition, motivation/affect, and behavior) and a higher level at which the collec- tive property manifests. Second, emergent phenomena are process oriented. (**knowledge in cc**)
* The substantive empha- sis is on the process mechanisms that drive the dynamic interactions among entities (e.g., individuals) that yield the emerged property. The process mechanisms are the theoretical engine of emergence; thus, they need to be specified with precision.
* Third, emergent phenomena take time to manifest at the higher level. Time frames may be very brief or quite lengthy, depending on the phenomenon. Finally, although it is not a core characteristic of emergence per se, contextual factors at the higher level shape and constrain the process dynamics of emergence. Thus, the context is a critical consideration in conceptualizing how emergence may unfold.
* The basic conundrum is that individual influence is bound up in the interactive processes of emergence.
* For example, the typology of emergence (Kozlowski & Klein, 2000) is consistent with our core conceptual foci and specifically describes different processes of interaction and exchange that yield different emergent forms, ranging from composition (i.e., convergent forms) to compilation (i.e., divergent forms). Thus, it provides a useful conceptual foundation for theory building. However, the fundamental process mechanisms relevant to specific substantive phenomena would typically have to be elaborated in more precise detail. This is particularly true for the nonlinear, compilation forms of emergence.
* Second, emergence takes time to unfold and manifest. That means using longitudinal research designs and, to truly capture complexity in emergence, intensive longitudinal designs with many repeated measurements; not 5 or 10 or 20, but 30 or more (DeShon, 2012; Walls & Schafer, 2006).
* That is merely one simple form. The more important focus of emergence is on process mechanisms and dynamics: how lower level characteristics coalesce or diverge to create meaningful higher level patterns.
* In existing social units with a history, emergence has already happened for most major phenomena
* How emergence has been measured:
* qualitative indirect, is charac- terized by research using retrospective accounts (e.g., interviews, case studies, etc.) that attempt to capture interpretations of emergence after it has occurred. Emergence is an inference; the process is not captured directly.
* qualitative direct, is characterized by research that situates the observer in the midst of the people and system undergoing change (e.g., ethnography, participant observation, participatory action).
* quantitative indirect, is represented by contemporary micro–meso multilevel research that focuses on emerged constructs. This approach assumes a model of the emergence process (i.e., there is a theoretical rationale for how the phenomenon at the lower level combines to manifest at the higher level), but does not assess it directly. The emergence process is not the research focus, the emerged construct is. Emergence is an inference
* quantitative direct, is largely characterized by simulation research using computational modeling in an effort to model the system dynamics of emergence. This approach treats the process of emergence as the central phenomenon of interest. Representing mechanisms that drive the process of emergence formally (i.e., mathematically) is the focal concern. The quantitative indirect and direct approaches employ distinct research designs and methods and, thus there has been very little cross fertilization.
* On Quantitative Direct:
  * **Such research examines cross-level or multilevel models that incorporate combinations of direct, mediating, and/or moderating effects (Aguinis, Boyd, Pierce & Short, 2011; Kozlowski & Klein, 2000). Emergence is relevant in such models when a phenomenon originates at a lower level in the system (e.g., individual cognition, motivation/affect, behavior), but emerges theoretically as a higher level construct (e.g., team mental models, team collaboration).**
* Construct/measurement frameworks provide guidance to help researchers appropriately measure the phenomenon at the lower level and substantiate its representation at the higher level of analysis. Bliese et al. (2007) describe the conceptual challenges of aggregating lower level data to the higher level. Aggregation either maintains the lower level meaning or can yield a substantively different construct at the higher level; this problem is not trivial (Bliese, 2000; Chen et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2005; Sampson, 2003). Chan (1998), for example, distinguished five types of composition models (i.e., additive, direct consensus, referent shift, dispersion, and process). Although there are important conceptual differences, most types rely on the unit mean (i.e., additive, direct consensus, referent shift) for representing the higher level construct.4 Dispersion models treat within-group variance as a meaningful focal construct, instead of error variance (Bliese & Halverson, 1998; Brown, Kozlowski, & Hattrup, 1996). Process models focus on how a process at a lower level might be conceptualized at a higher level (e.g., Kozlowski, Gully, Nason, & Smith, 1999). Chan offers no algorithm for representation and suggests more conceptual development of this model is needed to address the dynamics of change. Process models are essentially about emergence.
* Quantitative Direct Approach:
  * Most quantitative research in the social sciences relevant to emergence as a process of direct interest has utilized computational models and agent-based simulation as the primary research design approach (Epstein, 1999; Miller & Page, 2007). A computational model provides a mathematical depiction of a phenomenon of interest representing the mechanisms by which a dynamic process unfolds (Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993; Hulin & Ilgen, 2000; Miller & Page, 2007).
  * Such models specify mathematical equations or logical if–then statements to specify system dynamics from one time point to the next (Harrison, Lin, Carroll, & Carley, 2007; Vancouver, Tamanini, & Yoder, 2010; Vancouver, Weinhardt, & Schmidt, 2010)
  * Thus, the computational model formally specifies a set of rules or goals that guide the behavior of entities or ‘‘agents’’ of interest, in dynamic inter- action with other entities
  * An agent-based simulation instantiates the computational model in programming code, arranges the agents at Time 0 into an environment, and executes dynamic interactions among the agents following the rules within the constraints of the environment. Collective, system-level phenomena emerge as the simulation runs and individual agents interact dynamically over time.
  * 
* *development missing*
* *perfect framework rework*